# OOP with Java

## What is OOP?

OOP is short for object oriented programming. It is a paradigm, in other words it **is a style of programming and structuring code such that emphasizes representing real world data as objects in code.**

There a few guiding principles in the OOP paradigm:

1. **Encapsulation**: A Java class encapsulates the data and operations of a potential object and provides limited or indirect access to data to enforce a certain level of security. To access data while maintaining data integrity we use **getters and setters**

2. **Information hiding**: Decouple the dependency between software specification (the API) and the implementation (the code).

3. **Readability**: Mapping the classes and code as a whole to real world objects makes it easier to understand the logic. For example, a student object encapsulates their name, age, grade and more! We could use a method to calculate the GPA of a student based on their grades for each course!

4. **Inheritance and Extensibility**: The ability to add new features to an existing object or class is possible in OOP. This is because of the hierarchy of classes enables the creation of specific classes that are specialized or derived from an existing class. For example, a teacher can have many courses and each course can have many students, there may be different types of students (e.g. resident vs non-resident) or different types of teachers (e.g. tenured and non-tenured).

5. **Polymorphism and Maintainability**: Polymorphism is the ability of an object to take on many forms. For example, a student can be a person, a teacher can be a person, and a teacher can be a teacher. This is once again enabled by the hierarchy of classes.

---

## Classes, Objects, and Data

A class defines the data and operations for a group of similar objects (I think of it as a blueprint for an object that is yet to be instantiated).

- The data that is encapsulated in an object goes by many names: "states", "properties", "attributes", e.t.c.

**For consistency we always try to comment a class via standard Javadoc style.**

```java

/**
 * This is a class comment.
 * @author Kelpo Chacha
 * There cannot be any space between the placement
 * of the comment and the class / method signature.
*/
public class Main {

    /**
     * This is the driver to unit test the public methods. Be concise as possible when commenting.
     * Additional explanation here won't be seen when you collapse the code.
     * @param args
    */
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        
    }
}

```

- For a more holistic coding standard for this class check out the coding standards on Canvas!

One of the most frequent violations is using magic numbers.

**A magic number is a numeric value, which remains constant (unchanged) throughout the execution of the program.**

- Always use the keywords `static final` to define the constants and make their names all upper case.

```java

public static final int TEN = 10; // Useless, don't do this.

private static final int MAXSIZE = 10; // good; only accesible within the class

public static final int CAPACITY = 10; // good; accesible anywhere

```

### Formatting suggestion (you don't have to do this)

This is the ideal order in which to structure your code from top to bottom:

1. Constants
2. Instance variables
3. Constructors (no arg, then with arg)
4. Private Methods (typically helper methods)
5. Public Methods
6. Main method (test cases)

Otherwise we will be using JUnit later!

---

## Copy Constructor

A copy constructor is a constructor that creates a new object by copying the state of an existing object.

```java

public class Main {

    public Main() { // default constructor
        
    }

    public Main(int i) { // parameterized constructor
        
    }

    public Main(Main other) {
        // copy other's state (clone other)        
    }

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        
    }
}

```

Method overloading: Using a method with the same name but different parameters. Binding happens at compile time (not runtime which we will discuss later).

### Shallow vs Deep Copy

```java

public class Main {

    public static void main(String[] args) {
     
     // The two lines below do not copy the data
     // of s1 into s2. s2 is simply a pointer that
     // points to the same underlying piece of data
     // as s1.
     Student s1 = new Student();
     Student s2  = s1;  

     // The two lines below do copy the data
     // of s3 into s4. s4 is a new object that
     // is a deep copy of s3.
     Student s3 = new Student(s1);
     // The line below uses the copy constructor
     Student s4 = new Student(s3); 
    }
}

```

### Primitive Data Types vs Objects

- A primitive datatype that is directly stored and used by value (not by reference).

Java has 5 such data types: boolean, char, byte, short, int, and long.

**On the other hand, an object has a structure composed of various types of data for a purpose.**

```java

public class Event{
    private Date date;
    private Time time;

    private String name;
    private String location;

    public Event(Date date, Time time, String name, String location) {
        this.date = date;
        this.time = time;
        this.name = name;
        this.location = location;
    }

    // Getters and Setters

    public Date getDate() {
        return date;
    }

    public void setDate(Date date) {
        this.date = date;
    }

    public Time getTime() {
        return time;
    }

    public void setTime(Time time) {
        this.time = time;
    }

    public String getName() {
        return name;
    }

    public void setName(String name) {
        this.name = name;
    }

    public String getLocation() {
        return location;
    }

    public void setLocation(String location) {
        this.location = location;
    }

    // Overriding toString()
    @Override
    public String toString() {
        return "Event [date=" + date + ", time=" + time + ", name=" + name + ", location=" + location + "]";
    }
}

```

**When we pass a primitive data type to a method, it is passed by value. We pass a copy of the primitive data type to the method!**

**When we pass an object to a method, it is passed by reference. A reference is simply a pointer that has the address of where the data is stored.**

---

## equals() and toString()

- Internally the `Object()` class in java stores the original version of the `equals()` method.

**The default implementation uses the double equals sign (==) which compares memory addresses not the underlying data of two objects.**

**This means that if you have two objects that refer to two distinct pieces of data that are equivalent, using `equals()` will return false because it is looking to see if the two pointers you passed in point to the same location in memory (it does not care about investigating what is stored in those locations).**

- Internally the `Object()` class in java stores the original version of the `toString()` method.

**The default implementation uses the `getHashcode()` method to print a non-descriptive representation of the object along with its location in memory (in hexadecimal). This is typically not what we want.**

**So what we want to do is always override the implementation of these two methods!**

- What is the distinction between overloading and overriding?

- Overriding involves using the same method with the same signature but changing the actual implementation! Remember to use the `@Override` tag.

- Overloading involves using the same method name but with different signatures such that the compiler can figure out which one to use in compile time.

---

## The ideal equals() method

```java

public boolean equals(Object obj) {
    if (obj instanceof Event) {
        // Downcast obj to Event
        Event other = (Event) obj;
        // Compare each field (if everything is equal then return true)
        return this.date.equals(other.date) && this.time.equals(other.time) && this.name.equals(other.name) && this.location.equals(other.location);
    }
}

```