# Introduction to the Basic Software Engineering Stack and GITHUB ðŸ‘

## Object Oriented Paradigm

Most projects make use of the Object Oriented paradigm. It is a very flexible paradigm that allows
for extensibility and reusability. Adding functionality or debugging is all the easier in modular
and human understandable code (which OOP encourages).

- OOA (OO Analysis) is concenerned with developing an object model of the problem domain.

- OOD (OO Design) is concenerned with the creating an OO model of the solution domain (e.g. how to implement the client's requirements).

- OOP (OO Programming) is the umbrella term used to define the tools (libraries, frameworks, languages)
that are used to implement the OOD.

---

## Software Architecture / Design

``` mermaid

   graph TB
    style UI fill:#C6F4D6, stroke:#C6F4D6, stroke-width:2px
    style Services fill:#B2FFFC, stroke:#B2FFFC, stroke-width:2px
    style Middleware fill:#8BC34A, stroke:#8BC34A, stroke-width:2px
    style DB fill:#3E8E41, stroke:#3E8E41, stroke-width:2px
    style OS fill:#2E865F, stroke:#2E865F, stroke-width:2px
    style Hardware/Network fill:#228B22, stroke:#228B22, stroke-width:2px

    UI[UI]
    Services[Services]
    Middleware[Middleware]
    DB[DB]
    OS[OS]
    Hardware/Network[Hardware/Network]

    UI --> Services --> Middleware --> DB --> OS --> Hardware/Network

```

The architectural design of a product consists of its presentation logic, business logic, data
access logic, and data storage.

- A frontend consists of UX (User Experience) and UI (User Interface) design.
- The backend consists of business logic, data access logic, and data design (how the data is stored).

---

# Lets talk Github

Github is a platform that allows collaborative, asynchronous, code development.

- Github implements a robust system for maintaining and managing code **in distinct containers called repositories**.

- Different users can suggest their own modifications to your code (assuming your repository is public) and then you can choose to merge those changes into the actual "main" repository. **This is enabled via the concept of branches.**

- In order to work on a repository locally you have two options:

1) Initialize a repository within your code

2) Clone an existing repository from GitHub (from online)

Both options are enabled via **Git** which you can think of as a set of tools and commands that
work hand in hand with github.

#### Technically Git came first, then people created GitHub as a public platform that leveraged it for online and public collaboration.

- Git is considered a "distributed version control system" and should be downloaded from: https://git-scm.com

Development in Github can be explained with the following diagram:





